every month the federal government
spends hundreds of billions hundreds of
billions on entitlement programs of
course that's alright because all that
money goes toward helping the poor if
you think that I'm afraid you have to
think again joining us today John Cogan
the author of the high cost of good
intentions uncommon knowledge now
[Music]
welcome to uncommon knowledge I'm Peter
Robinson a fellow at the Hoover
Institution here at Stanford John Cogan
received his undergraduate and doctoral
degrees from UCLA he has devoted his
career to studying American domestic
policy especially fiscal and budgetary
policy dr. Cogan acquired practical
experience during the 1980s when he
served in senior positions in the Reagan
administration first at the Department
of Labor and then at the Office of
Management and Budget
John Cogan's newest book the high cost
of good intentions a history of u.s.
federal entitlement programs
John Cogan welcome well thank you Peter
it's a pleasure to be here John first
things first what are we talking about
when we're talking about entitlement
programs why are they a separate
category different from other kinds of
spending well it's actually a great a
great question to start off with Peter
you know entitlements have come to mean
very different things to different
people to some people and entitlement is
a handout it's an unearned benefit right
so for them entitlements are kind of a
derogatory term to other people and
entitlement is a benefit that cannot be
taken away a person has a legal right to
that benefit and that right is
irrevocable and so we have very
different views about what entitlements
are for us today
we'll adopt the non loaded definition of
entitlements an entitlement is simply a
an entitlement program is simply a
program that provides a benefit under
the law to anyone who qualifies for the
benefit as provided in the law so let's
take Social Security is a good example
if you've worked in a covered job for
ten years and you reach the age of 66
you are entitled under the law to
receive a benefit you have a legal right
to receiving that benefit but since
these benefits are prescribed in law
Congress can write another law to
change those benefits and so the legal
right is a little bit attenuated in the
sense that any future Congress can
change that right so what are the best
examples of entitlements the
entitlements that I cover in the book
whether you're Social Security Medicare
food stamps the Medicaid program
Supplemental Security income the Earned
Income Tax Credit so there's a bevy of
these programs what makes them different
right right then then other programs in
the budget is that from an expenditure
or budgetary standpoint they are
open-ended the amount that gets expended
in any year on an entitlement is
determined by the number of people that
qualify for the benefit and the benefits
that are paid to each qualified person
and so ex ante when the government is
trying to set a budget for the total it
has to estimate the number of entitled
persons the number of recipients and it
has to estimate the average benefit that
each one will get in a very complex
country with a lot of moving parts
that's a very difficult thing to do
you can only kind of know after the fact
what an entitlement expenditure is going
to be you can't forecast it very well in
advance so that the critical distinction
say for example on defense spending
Congress says this year we will spend
750 billion dollars
Department of Defense you figure out how
to spend that but an entitlement
spending god tells you how many sixty
six year olds there are in America there
just are so in so many 66 year olds and
Congress eyes God but the demographics
tell Congress how much it's going to
spend absolutely right the demographics
the economic conditions and the behavior
of individuals who might wish to qualify
for that okay all right so this is a
history your uu it's entitled a history
of federal entitlement programs and you
say several times in the book look folks
I'm just telling you what's happened
here
so I
bear that in mind we'll get to the
history in a moment I'd like just a kind
of snapshot of where we are we're
entitlement programs have brought us and
I'm going to quote a couple of passages
from the high cost of good intentions
quote 55% 55% of all US households
receive cash or an in-kind assistance
from at least one major federal
entitlement program the two point four
trillion the federal government
currently spends annually on
entitlements equals $7,500 for every man
woman and child living in the United
States close quote now what I find so
striking about that is that I
immediately REM remembered the
controversy when loaded five years ago
Mitt Romney was running for president
and in off what he thought was an off
the record moment he said to a group of
donors look folks we have a serious
problem
forty-four seven percent of people in
this country receive federal benefits so
of course they're going to vote for
bigger government and here if you
measure it by household it's well over
half how can this be John well it's not
as if we're moving so that over half of
people get some federal assistance it is
a truly an extraordinary place that
we've arrived at when you go back and
look at the origins of each of these as
modern entitlements each one was
established with what you and I would
agree I'm sure most of your listeners
would agree is is a set of good
intentions the Great Society and the New
Deal programs were established provide a
safety net against poverty for those in
old age and for those younger people who
ended up in poverty through no fault of
their own right from that small
honorable beginning we end up with a set
of programs as you said that costs 7,500
for every man woman and child and
provide assistance to over half of the
population here's one more quotation
from the high cost of good intentions
the amount the federal government spends
each year on entitlement programs is
five times the money necessary to lift
every person out of poverty
so the original good intention let's
help the poor and we are now spending
five times more than necessary to
satisfy that original and honorable
good intention is that am i
understanding that correctly it's a very
good way of illustrating just how
different the current system is from
those original noble intentions very
little goes to alleviating poverty you
said 20% all right now the how it happen
to come to the history and you start
with a Revolutionary War pension
programs for Revolutionary War veterans
and I would like to explain to you I'm
going to sit here with my eyes wide and
my jaw dropping as I listened to the
early part of the history Revolutionary
War pensions civil war pensions because
I thought and I believe that a lot of
people of my general age and education
also thought that it all started with a
New Deal will come to the New Deal in a
moment but it didn't start with the New
Deal and you proved that it didn't tell
us about Revolutionary War pensions and
civil war pensions so the way I've put
it is entitlements are as old as the
Republic and the Revolutionary War
pension program which was a program that
provided assistance initially for
soldiers who had served in the
Continental Army and who had been
disabled as a result of wartime service
that was the very first entitlement
within about 20 years Congress decided
that they would expand that entitlement
beyond those that had served in the
Continental Army to those that had
served in the state militia and to those
that had volunteered for service again
so long as they were disabled in wartime
service Congress then subsequently
extended the program again and again by
the 1830s when we would have thought
that most Civil War veterans were had
gone to their final reward in heaven
Congress extended the assistance to
anyone who had served in any capacity
regardless of disability during the
Revolution and that was a first inkling
of the explosive nature
of these entitlement programs Congress
thought at the time that they might be
extending benefits to just a few
remaining Revolutionary War pensioners
but in the end over 33,000 Revolutionary
War pensioners ended up collecting
benefits three times the number that
were collecting benefits just prior to
the war and then about 60 years later
they do it all over again you write that
in 1873 so we have a civil war right
pensions for Civil War soldiers 1873
about two hundred thousand Americans
receive Civil War pensions by the 1890s
20 years later that number had risen to
1 million same kind of pattern
absolutely exactly the same kind of
pattern what's I call the Civil War
pension program the first grand
entitlement program because it was so
large compared to the Revolutionary War
a pension program by the 1890s when
nearly a million individuals were
receiving Civil War pensions the Civil
War pension program accounted for 40% of
all federal spending
now if Andrew Finney was a lot lower
than than it is today worse but it was
40% of the budget and you mentioned that
pensioner number in 1873 1873 right you
would have thought that by 1873 anyone
who was going to qualify for a
disability pension based upon their the
disabling injury in wartime service
would have already qualified that
there'd be no new people qualifying if
you'd been shot by 1865 you'd certainly
have known it by 1873 fair point all
right right and so it was a series of
expansions both legislative and
administrative that ended up expanding
the program to cover Civil War Union
veterans Civil War Union veterans only
the Confederate soldiers need not apply
right they ended up covering Union
soldiers that had
we're disabled in the 1890s regardless
of whether their disability was related
to wartime service or not and then
eventually by the end of the century
virtually all Civil War veterans Union
veterans were covered by the program the
same way as it happened with the
Revolutionary War alright so this is a
good moment we're coming up to the New
Deal comes next but we're coming up to a
couple of the big themes of your book
and one is the way the reason for this
ratchet they get bigger and bigger and
bigger and that starts right back at the
beginning of the Republic with the
Revolutionary War pensions and every
entitlement programs since why because
john cowan writes up because of quote a
well-meaning human impulse to treat all
similarly situated people equally under
the law
close quote explain that how does that
account for the ratchet so what happens
when an entitlement is created you end
up establishing forces that cause the
expansion and you just hit on the main
force okay so when an entitlement is
created usually the eligibility rules
confined the group of recipients fairly
narrowly for policy reasons or budgetary
reasons Continental Army soldiers and
seamen only right but over time those
individuals that are just outside of
that eligibility circle that just don't
qualify for the benefits start clamoring
for assistance on the ground that
they're no less worthy of assistance
than the individuals who are receiving
benefits so in the case of the militia
they bled just as much they suffered
just as much for their injuries from the
War of Independence as members of the
Continental Army did and so Congress
eventually acquiescence and expands the
entitlement to include
them but all that does is bring another
group like the circle just out to hide a
circle they start clamoring and you get
this constant pressure for extending
benefits to equally worthy individuals
everybody wants to come in from the dark
to be near the campfire so you need to
keep throwing logs on that fire that's
right these these pressures Peter now
are magnified when you have large budget
surpluses and of course there are
magnified by the desire by elected
officials to be reelected right now this
is a polka so we mentioned the Civil War
veterans these expansions are taking
place in the 1880s in the 1890s another
one other interesting thing is happening
in the 1880s and 1890s which is that the
Republicans the GOP is consolidating its
power as the dominant political party in
the country and that lasts right
actually into the early part of the 20th
century with Grover Cleveland as the
Honorable exception so and and and you
know you can read a lot of American
history I've read a fair amount myself
and you think well the Republican Party
they're consolidating their gains than
the Northeast they're the party of
industry and developing nobody has ever
said they bought their way into it by
using entitlements and yet Cogan says of
course they did just look at the facts
look at the data in the book I make the
case that the provision of pensions
really did play an important role in
this realignment of the electorate in
the 1880s 1890s and first part of the
20th century behind the Republican Party
the Republican Party had a great
platform they had a they were a party of
high tariffs to protect the
manufacturing sector and the workers in
the cities and the high tariffs
generated an enormous amount of revenue
and with those revenues they lavished
pensions on Civil War veterans it was a
wonderful combination and it proved to
be very very effective in in in in their
electoral prospects so you've got the
impulse that lives in the heart of every
decent human being to treat people
fairly and and those who are similar
you're just outside the circle oh come
on in right then you've got the
discovery that in eka not in times of
economic when Congress has money to
spend
it'll spend in right and then and this
is something that doesn't seem to be
true of the Revolutionary War pensions
exactly but certainly by the last part
of the 19th century politicians have
figured it out they can use entitlements
to solidify support okay now we come to
the 1930s and the New Deal the high cost
of good intentions the New Deal broke
new ground by a kiss tending
entitlements to people in the general
population who had performed no
particular service to the federal
government close quote
why is that an important departure well
I mean you think about pension
entitlements prior to the New Deal they
were confined to wartime soldiers who
had suffered disabilities and eventually
that group it was a closed group only
people who serve could get it and
eventually that group would pass on and
the entitlement expenditures would
decline right now very often that would
take a long time and a surprisingly long
time if I could make it a little aside
there is still one civil war pension
recipient alive today that's how long
the entire was that even possible
here we are a hundred and fifty two
years from the end of the Civil War and
they were still paying that against the
wet and her name is Irene Triplett and
Irene's father Mose Triplett was a first
a Confederate soldier but then he
changed sides towards the end of the war
to the Union side
Mose married Elida Hall in 1924 I
believe he was 78 and she was 28 I see I
see yes he was the recipient of a
pension and so when he passed on his
wife
receive that pension and then when she
passed on
Irene received the pension Irene is the
stalker the daughter of that late I'm
sorry yes right Laurie Irene was born I
believe in 1930 and so she is still with
us yes yes
welcome Arthur pension believe me yes
right right right right
but in any event so these entitlements
for wartime soldiers were real they were
confined to a particular group in
society that was not a large group and
it was a group that was going to pass on
the New Deal entitlements on the other
hand opened up entitlements to members
of the general population who had never
performed any service to their country
so two individuals just because they
reached a particular age I opened up on
a population that would constantly renew
is that it would right so there was no
end to it right and this phenomenon
where it's once you've granted a benefit
it's very difficult to take it away when
you have this continually renewable
group that's entering the benefits
continue to escalate if you have a case
on the other hand with wartime veterans
one group passes away and other war
starts and you're in effect starting
over again you get to rethink it at
least in theory that's right and try a
reset right right Social Security I'd
never thought of this before but Social
Security would be the first time in
American history when the federal
government committed itself to paying a
certain kind of benefit to a certain
class of people until the end of time
outside of those that had perform public
service right but I mean to say those
who perform public service would die yes
but from now on we give anybody at that
you reach a certain age and until the
end of the Republic everybody who
reaches that age gets good that's okay
that's a stack all right and then from
the New Deal quickly to the 1960s and
the Great Society quoting again from the
high cost of good intentions the launch
of Lyndon Johnson's Great Society
program in 1965 marks the beginning of a
remarkable 10-year period of entitlement
legislation that is unprecedented in US
history close quote
so we create society we see the creation
of Medicare and Medicaid dramatic
expansions in Social Security and other
programs and quoting you once again
revenues from a rapidly expanding
economy economy's booming in the early
60s provided the fuel ok so what do we
why do we get this the economy is
booming but this is something new the
Great Society we worked for a man Ronald
Reagan who didn't really have that much
against the New Deal but it was the
Great Society that he thought was the
overreach how do you distinguish the
Great Society from the New Deal or war
was our beloved Gipper simply mistaken
about that is it just a kind of line
extension of products the federal
government is already providing well
that's a very good question I'm not sure
I've got a great answer for you but but
there were important differences between
the New Deal and the Great Society the
New Deal established social insurance as
the central means of providing
assistance to senior citizens right
there would be no means test you would
get the benefit independent of your
income in welfare on the on the other
hand the New Deal said the federal
government is not going to be involved
in welfare it is going to give grants to
States so they can run their programs as
they see fit the federal government will
provide a means of support for those
welfare programs with the new deal with
the Great Society did was of course
expand the social insurance programs
creating Medicare the sister of the
Social Security program and expanding
the disability insurance program but
it's major change I think was involving
the federal government directly into the
provision of welfare for individuals and
that's the main I think distinction
between the New Deal which was kind of a
hands-off policy when I came to welfare
and the Great Society where the federal
government game became involved in
writing the rules writing the
regulations and ordering States to
modify their rules
now you mentioned earlier that I think
it was with the Civil War
you get tariffs providing revenues the
money's rolling into Congress so it's in
good times they're willing to spend on
entitlements and we've got the good
times during the early 60s so the
federal revenues are expanding the Great
Society makes a certain kind of sense
but the New Deal was not good times
you've got this strange ratchet which
you address in the book where they grow
during good times because the revenues
there are there and they grow during bad
times why
so in the 19th century growing during
good times was simply because there was
money on the table right Congress will
spend any money that they have and then
some the New Deal and the Great Society
change the nature of entitlements to
become sort of anti-poverty programs so
now during economic downtown's when the
misery of the population increases the
extent of impoverish this impoverishment
increases you end up generating
pressures for expanded entitlements and
so now when you think about the
entitlement problem we have when we get
economic good times and the revenues
flow into the Treasury Congress will
start expanding entitlements right but
it's also the case at the other end of
the business cycle when you have
economic recession there's a bigger need
to provide assistance to individuals who
are suffering from that recession
there's a larger number of them
suffering and so you get another round
of expansion so the argument no matter
what the state of the economy is always
expand the entitlement programs expand
them because we have the money and we
can do so or expand them because we
don't have the money if people need help
and when you look at the 60s and the 70s
the late 60s and 70s we had very big
economic cycles yes especially in the
70s and you see at the top of the cycle
expansions and Social Security at the
bottom of the cycle expansions in
welfare got it and one more point I want
to return to the present day
before we finish this sort of quick
historical overview if Republicans
played politics with the civil war
pensions the Democrats played politics
with the New Deal in the Great Society
again the high cost of good intentions
quote Democrats raised the practice of
using entitlements for electoral gain to
a finely honed skill from the end of
World War two through 1975 seven of the
ten legislative increases in Social
Security monthly benefits took effect
during an election year close quote
so is that word what's the word we're
looking for here shameless brazen or
just politics as usual that's just the
way Washington does business now it is
the way it is the way can I can I can I
tell you a little story of course about
the the last of these large increases
during an election and it occurred in
1972 and it's very very illustrative of
the way the system worked all right so
at that time Social Security was not
indexed or benefits were not indexed to
inflation so if there was inflation
Congress would have to raise benefits
through legislation so in early 1972 the
process was going along as normal the
house had agreed to something like a 5%
increase Senate wanted a benefit
increase that was a little bit higher to
compensate individuals for inflation but
it was an election year and there were
four candidates on the Democratic side
running for the party's nomination
McGovern muskie McGovern muskie Mills
Wilbur Mills yes the chairman of the
committee that writes Social Security
legislation right and the happy warrior
he will come free right
and so the bidding process began after
the Senate muskie came in with a 20%
benefit hike Mills a 20% benefit hike
McGovern a 20% benefit hike these are
big big big increases for everybody on
the rolls then and of course it would
apply all future recipients as well and
so then Hubert Humphrey capped off the
bidding with a
25% increase in benefits so this is all
in the spring of 1972 so then in June
members of the Senate on the Democratic
side we're looking for a bill that they
could attach the twenty percent or 25
percent increase to and they latched on
to a debt ceiling bill the debt ceiling
was set to expire at midnight on June
30th and the Democrats got together and
proposed to it to add to that debt
ceiling bill a 20% increase in Social
Security benefits so they did that a few
days before the 30th debated it went to
the went for a vote on the 30th got sent
over to the House of Representatives at
the last minute the house had no other
alternative but to sign the bill or to
pass the bill and Richard Nixon signed
the debt ceiling bill with a 20%
increase right before midnight
Nixon was upset he didn't think this was
very fiscally responsible and said so in
his veto message I was signing me his
signing message the scheduled increase
was to occur in the October Social
Security checks just before November
which is election month exactly all
right so when the checks went out to
over 25 million recipients it contained
a little note from the Social Security
Administration which said your check
contains a 20% benefit increase due to
the actions of the 93rd Congress and
Richard M Nixon re-election in 1972
that's right why so one president tried
to try to change the rules of the way
Washington worked and rein in
entitlements and if the there's a long
and fascinating chapter on Ronald Reagan
but this is television we've got to move
so let me just quote your conclusion
here despite the Reagan administration's
achievements
the entitlement state in 1989 the year
he left office remained largely intact
and the achievement was he didn't
actually shrink it but he did keep it
from growing roughly isn't that right
1.4 percent a year in real per capita
terms was the growth rate the smallest
growth rate for any Administration in
the post-world War two period except for
a period where where the GI Bill was
winding down right but no other
president in the modern era took such a
comprehensive approach to reining in
entitlements and no other president was
as successful as President Reagan was
but if you said the success was pretty
limited entitlement and it's a great
thing we were there yeah and you were in
the Office of Management and Budget it
took everything you had just to keep
this thing from getting bigger didn't it
that's exactly right and and most of the
changes that were made would have a
long-term effect but they were enacted
in 1981 and in 1982 and a little bit in
1983 with Social Security reform but
after that after the signature reforms
early in the administration yes yes and
then Reagan hung on for the next six
years five years as Congress again and
again tried to undo the entitlement
changes that had been made in the early
part of his administration he was
largely successful in combating most of
the large reversals of his policies in
hence of the success and even though he
is succeeded by a fellow Republican and
indeed the man who served as Ronald
Reagan's own vice president for eight
years George HW Bush the entitlements
take off all over again yes and they've
been the it that all the vectors have
been pointing up ever since is that
correct that's right that trajectory has
been ever upward since okay we've spoken
about the fiscal cost but you talk you
write with great passion really an
overused word about the human
let me let me quote a couple of passages
and ask you to explain what you mean
Social Security and Medicare have
reduced the perceived need by young
workers to save for their retirement and
have induced senior citizens to go four
to forego years of productive and
rewarding employment close quote well if
you're not saving when you should be
saving and you're not you you you retire
too early that's a distortion of the
entire workforce of people's entire
careers correct correct
it's bad John and getting worse
let's go back to the first statistic
that you mentioned right fifty-four
percent of all households in the US are
receiving some entitlement benefits now
for some of those a 55 percent according
to you in your own voice we updated it
oh no I'm sure you're right 54 55 55 in
any event the with such a large fraction
of the population receiving assistance
the incentive effects that the
assistance carries with it is going to
have an effect upon the economy as a
whole the whole economy and so if we go
back 30 40 years when we thought about
the welfare system we would recognize
that our efforts to help people often
ended up being counterproductive because
we created incentives for individuals to
stay out of the waiver force to not get
married to have a child out of wedlock
actions that were probably not
necessarily in the long-term interests
of those individuals right so we
recognized that along with the
assistance that we were providing to
individuals in need we had to be mindful
of the incentives that we were creating
for these individuals to behave in
certain ways right now that 54 55
percent of the of the
of the populations receiving these
benefits we've we now have an
economy-wide problem used to be a
microcosm of welfare recipients now it's
an economy-wide problem so one more
quote that you touched on it just now
one more quotation here the system has
created incentives for young women to
bear children out of wedlock and remain
unmarried and it has discouraged fathers
of young children from meeting their
parental responsibilities close quote
and I have to try something on you what
came to mind when I read that passage
was the famous report is just just over
50 years ago Daniel Daniel Patrick
Moynihan's it was called the Negro
family the case for national action and
he wrote that the fundamental problem is
that a family structure the the black
family in urban ghettos is crumbling
1965 and that was an alarming fact to
Daniel Patrick Moynihan and when he
wrote that in 1965 the first year of the
Great Society the illegitimate see rate
among African Americans was 25 percent
and it shocked Daniel Patrick Moynihan
into writing that famous memorandum
today after more than half a century of
the Great Society the illegitimate C
rate among whites is 36 percent among
Hispanics is more than 50 percent and
among african-americans is more than 72
percent and your argument is that some
unknowable portion but some portion of
that is because of federal entitlement
programs yes we have been spending
hundreds of billions of dollars to
dissolve the American family well I
wouldn't quite put it as strong is that
I would think about it a little bit
differently that is I would go back to
the title of the book that the
intentions of these programs are good
they're honorable they're noble but not
enough attention has been paid to the
cost that is incurred both at the
individual level and at the national
level and we need to pay more attention
to those costs and when it comes to
welfare try to design programs that
provide that assistance to those who
through no fault of their own are in
poverty but at the same time don't have
these incentives for counterproductive
behavior all right so you know what the
final couple of questions have to be
what do we do about this what do we do
about this here we have what you've
discovered what you write is that the
problem is worse than I thought and and
I've read a fair amount about this over
the years it goes right back to the
founding of the Republic as you say we
now are in a position in which we're
moving on money around the
redistribution is so extreme that more
Americans are getting something from the
federal government than not politicians
have figured out how to use this to buy
votes so politicians aren't going to
give it up very easily and we are now in
a position where if the economy is bad
entitlement programs should expand and
if the economy is good well entitlement
programs should expand then too and this
is the part that breaks my heart
eight years of Ronald Reagan and John
Cogan Athiya in the Office of Management
and Budget just held it in preventive
from it was a kind of eight year
containment and then it took off all
over again so what do we do what do I
mean there is an argument that it's over
that this is one thing of the founders
spotted the importance of freedom of
speech they spotted all kinds of
pernicious effects that democracy might
have unless they gave us the Bill of
Rights they construct this but they
missed the willingness of Americans to
pick each other's pockets by way of the
federal government and the American
experiment is doomed we're in such a
trap right now we can't get out of it
that's not a very optimistic story well
I'm hoping that you will tell me I'm
wrong in every particular well whoa
other parts of the book I talk about
efforts that have been made to rein in
entitlements right now if we could get
the growth of entitlements down to the
level that Ronald Reagan did we would
take care of most of our entitlement
problem going for
for now I'll just hold it to a percent
and a half a year yeah and grow the
economy at 3% in your okay exactly but
there are other very important examples
of presidents that have managed to get
Congress to reduce benefits and so you
know we look back over the last two
decades and we don't see any
retrenchment on entitlements so for most
of us we say well we can't do anything
about it nobody has but farther back in
history you folks went in Clinton in
1996 welfare reform is that an example
of anything we ought to be happy about I
think it is I think it is and in fact it
might actually have a little bit of a
lesson for Obamacare or the Affordable
Care Act so when President Clinton took
office welfare was in crisis the welfare
rolls had shot up after Reagan had left
office during George Herbert Walker Bush
term in office President Clinton as you
know entered office with a pledge to end
welfare as we know it what people don't
know about Clinton was that he used
authority that had been granted to the
executive branch during the Reagan years
to allow states to operate their own
welfare programs under federal waivers
of the federal law so Bill Clinton when
he entered office six states were
operating under these waivers right loan
programs by 1996 before the Welfare
Reform Act was passed 45 states were
operating their own welfare programs
under federal waivers some states
severely restricted eligibility other
states established childcare programs
training progress meaning 45 experiments
different ways right so then when the
Republicans took over Congress they took
up the cudgel of welfare reform and
eventually welfare reform passed and
President Clinton
into office assignment into law I
believe that had it not been for this
demonstration that states could spend
taxpayer money better on welfare than
the federal government could I don't
believe absent that demonstration that
we would have seen the welfare reform
law of 1996 passing it is a remarkable
law arguably the most successful
entitlement reform in US history so one
big lesson is push this stuff back to
the states let them experiment alright
and when it comes to the Affordable Care
Act or Obamacare which is now being
debated Congress maybe it's time to take
the Medicaid program and block grant
that to the states and the same thing
with the insurance exchanges maybe it's
time to let the states experiment with
those exchanges to allow them to develop
exchanges that work better for their mix
of the population John - moving toward a
close here a couple of quotations the
first is John Koken and the high cost of
good intentions the basic purposes of
entitlements their structure and the
level of government that operates them
move them back to the states need to be
thoroughly restructured close quote
here's the second quotation Donald Trump
announcing his candidacy for president
quote save Medicare Medicaid and Social
Security without cuts have to do it
close quote so what do we do anybody who
is concerned about reforming
entitlements just has to wait out the
Trump administration or is it is it the
case that Donald Trump is making a
calculation here first we get economic
growth we've got to cut taxes we've got
to get growth and I'm not taking on
these huge fights after all george w
bush spent the first two years of his
second term trying to get Social
Security reform and got nothing
legislation wasn't even introduced the
ran into a wall Trump to say I'm not
running into that wall we're gonna get
growth first what do you think well Who
am I to try to get inside Donald
from it but but I can only hope that he
has decided that economic growth is
going to be the central policy of his
first couple of years in office and then
he'll turn to entitlement and I I think
when he becomes more familiar with
actually how important these
entitlements are for his own budget
I think I'm hoping that he'll see the
need for some some type of change
alright last question toward the end of
the high cost of good intentions you
quote your friends the late economist
rose and Milton Friedman quote tides in
the affairs of societies begin in the
minds of men then spread to the conduct
of public policy close quote it actually
reminds me of Margaret Thatcher who said
first win the argument mm-hmm then
changed the policy right
the question I have is that's a slow
process you you've just you've kicked it
off here but that's a slow process and
entitlement spending is choking the
budget in particular it's squeezing out
defense spending is there time are you
are you are you mean do we have three
decades to for this to all the
intellectual ferment to work its way
through to policy change are you
optimistic yes I am you've just become a
grandfather yes your is your little
granddaughter grow up in a country that
has entitlements under control
absolutely yes yes I am a complete
optimist on this look the tide has been
coming in for some time well since the
beginning of the Republic no I think I
think the tolerate the director kind of
correction the tides are correction has
been coming in I think the the the
Ronald Reagan's administration was the
beginning of that tide I think the Obama
administration was a complete exception
to the tide if you look at the
intellectual world what you see is very
sound arguments that are slowly
gathering support among the populace for
some type of change in in the
entitlement system
and I think what we need to move it
forward though is a president and maybe
a Congress but mostly a president who
believes that in the necessity of reform
we don't have that right now but
hopefully we'll have a president who
recognizes the need for reform and the
need to get these entitlements under
control
John Cogan who argues that Ronald Reagan
that Obama was the anomaly not Ronald
Reagan that the Reagan was just the
beginning yes John Cogan author of the
high cost of good intentions a history
of US federal entitlement programs thank
you
Peter thank you very much I'm Peter
Robinson for uncommon knowledge and the
Hoover Institution thank you
[Music]